---
title: Fundamentals of Database Systems
subtitle: Chapter 14: Basics of Functional Dependencies and Normalisation for Relational Databases
authors: |
         | Ramez Elmasri
         | Shamkant B Navathe
---

# 14.1 Informal Design Guidelines for Relational Schemas
## 14.1.1 Imparting Clear Semantics to Attributes in Relations
The relational schema design should have a clear meaning and be easy to explain.

## 14.1.2 Redundant Information in Tuples and Update Anomalies

## 14.1.3 `NULL` Values in Tuples

## 14.1.4 Generation of Spurious Tuples

## 14.1.5 Summary and Discussion of Design Guidelines

# 14.2 Functional Dependencies
## 14.2.1 Definition of Functional Dependency
A functional dependency is a constraint between two sets of attributes from the database. Let the whole database be represented as R = {A1, A2, ..., An}. A functional dependency is denoted X -> Y and means that t1[X] = t2[X] => t1[Y] = t2[Y] for all t1, t2 in all relation states r of R.  

Note that if X is a candidate key of R, then X -> Y for all sets of attributes Y.  

A FD is a property of the relation schema and *not* of its extension or state. It cannot therefore be derived from a state, but must be defined according to the semantics of R. F denotes the set of FDs specified on a relation schema R.

# 14.3 Normal Forms Based on Primary Keys
## 14.3.1 Normalisation of Relations
Normalisation can be considered a process of analysing relation schemata based on their FDs and primary keys to achieve the desirable properties of minimising redundancy and minimising anomalies.  

The normal form of a relation refers to the highest NF condition that it meets. In isolation, normal forms do not guarantee good database design, but other properties must be checked for.

## 14.3.2 Practical Use of Normal Forms
Denormalisation is the process of storing the join of higher normal form relations as a base relation, which is in a lower normal form.

## 14.3.3 Definitions of Keys and Attributes Participating in Keys
A superkey of a relation schema R is a set of attributes whose combined value is unique for all tuples. A key is a minimal superkey.  

If a relation schema has multiple keys, each is called a candidate key. One of them is called the primary key, and the rest are secondary.  

An attribute of a relation schema is called a prime attribute if it is a member of some candidate key of R. Otherwise, it is called nonprime.

## 14.3.4 First Normal Form (1NF)
It disallows having a set, a tuple or a combination of values as an attribute value for a single tuple.  

This can be handled by moving the multivalued attribute to a separate relation along with the PK of the old relation; or expand the key to have a separate tuple for each value; or (if the maximum number of values is known) add a number of columns for each value.

## 14.3.5 Second Normal Form (2NF)
A FD X -> Y is a full FD if the removal of any attribute A from X means that the dependency no longer holds.  
R is in 2NF if every nonprime attribute A in R is fully functionally dependent on the primary key of R.  

A relation can be converted to 2NF by moving the subset of the PK on which some attribute is dependent to another table with that attribute.

## 14.3.6 Third Normal Form
A FD X -> Y is a transitive dependency if there is some set of attributes Z that is not a subset of any key such that X -> Z and Z -> Y hold.  
R is in 3NF if it is in 2NF and no nonprime attribute of R is transitively dependent on the primary key.

# 14.4 General Definitions of Second and Third Normal Forms
## 14.4.1 General Definition of Second Normal Form
R is in 2NF if every nonprime attribute A in R is not partially dependent on any key of R (is fully dependent on every key of R).

## 14.4.2 General Definition of Third Normal Form
R is in 3NF if, whenever a nontrivial FD X -> A holds in R, either X is a superkey of R or A is a prime attribute of R.

## 14.4.3 Interpreting the General Definition of Third Normal Form
The first condition catches cases where a nonprime attribute determines another (violating 3NF), and where a proper subset of a key determined a nonprime attribute (violating 2NF).  

In other words, R is in 3NF if every nonprime attribute is fully functionally dependent on every key of R, and nontransitively dependent on every key of R.

# 14.5 Boyce-Codd Normal Form
It is stricter than 3NF. A relation is in BCNF if whenever a nontrivial FD X -> A holds, then X is a superkey.

## 14.5.1 Decomposition of Relations not in BCNF
We want decompositions to meet two properties – the nonadditive join property (certainly) and the functional dependency preservation property (preferably). The nonadditive join test for binary decompositions (NJB) allows us to check the first one.  
A decomposition D = {R1,R2} of R satisfies the lossless join property w.r.t. a set of FDs F on R iff either

* ((R1 \ints R2) -> (R1 - R2)) is in F+, or
* ((R1 \ints R2) -> (R2 - R1)) is in F+

In general, if X -> A is the FD that causes a violation of BCNF in R. Then decompose R into R-A and XA, and repeat if either is not in BCNF.
