---
title: Fundamentals of Database Systems
subtitle: Chapter 15: Relational Database Design Algorithms and Further Dependencies
authors: |
         | Ramez Elmasri
         | Shamkant B Navathe
---

# 15.1 Further Topics in Functional Dependencies: Inference Rules, Equivalence and Minimal Cover
## 15.1.2 Inference Rules for Functional Dependencies
A FD X -> Y is inferred from or implied by a set of dependencies F if X -> Y holds in every legal state of R.  

The set of all dependencies that include F as well as all inferable dependencies is called the closure of F, denoted F+.  
F |= X -> Y means that the dependency X -> Y is inferred from F.  

The following rules of inference are called Armstrong's axioms:

* IR1: If Y \subseteq X, then X -> Y (reflexive rule)
* IR2: X -> Y |= XZ -> YZ (augmentation rule)
* IR3: X -> Y, Y -> Z |= X -> Z (transitive rule)

Three further rules follow from the above:

* IR4: X -> YZ |= X -> Y (decomposition/projective rule)
* IR5: X -> Y, X -> Z |= X -> YZ (union/additive rule)
* IR6: X -> Y, WY -> Z |= WX -> Z (pseudotransitive rule)

The closure of a set of attributes X under F is denoted X+ and includes all attributes that are functionall determined by X based on F.

## 15.1.2 Equivalence of Sets of Functional Dependencies
A set F of FDs is said to cover another set E if E \subseteq F+.  
Two sets E and F of FDs are equivalent if E+ = F+.  

## 15.1.3 Minimal Sets of Functional Dependencies
A minimal cover of a set E of FDs is a set F of FDs such that E covers F and it does *not* cover any proper subset of F.  

An attribute in an FD is an extraneous attribute if we can remove it without changing the closure of the set. Formally, a set F of FDs is minimal if

* every FD has a single attribute on its RHS
* no attribute can be removed from the LHS of any FD
* no dependency can be removed from F

# 15.2 Properties of Relational Decompositions
## 15.2.1 Relational Decomposition and Insufficiency of Normal Forms
Let R = {A1, ..., An} be a universal relation schema and D = {R1, ..., Rm} a decomposition of it. The union of all Ri is R – this is the attribute preservation condition.  

Further, each Ri should be in BCNF or 3NF. However, this is not enough.

## 15.2.2 Dependency Preservation Property of a Decomposition
If every dependency in F appeared in or could be derived from the dependencies of one of the Ri. This is called the dependency preservation condition.  

The projection of a set F of FDs on Ri, denoted πRi(F), is the set of all X -> Y in F+ such that XY is in Ri.  

D is dependency-preserving if the union of the projections of F on Ri is equivalent to F.  

## 15.2.3 Nonadditive (Lossless) Join Property of a Decomposition
This property ensures that no spurious tuples are generated when a NATURAL JOIN operation is applied.  

D has the lossless join property w.r.t F if for every relation state that satisfies F, \*(πR1(r), ..., πRm(r)) = r.

## 15.2.4 Testing Binary Decompositions for the Nonadditive Join Property
The NJB test allows us to test binary decompositions.

## 15.2.5 Successive Nonadditive Join Decompositions
If a decomposition D = {R1, ..., Rm} has the nonadditive join property w.r.t F on R, and if a decomposition Di = {Q1, ..., Qk} of Ri has it w.r.t the projection of F on Ri, then D2 = {R1, ..., R(i-1), Q1, ..., Qk, R(i+1), ..., Rm} also has it.

## 15.3 Algorithms for Relational Database Schema Design
## 15.3.1 Dependency-Preserving and Nonadditive (Lossless) Join Decomposition into 3NF Schemas
## 15.3.2 Nonadditive Join Decomposition into BCNF Schemas
